The Greek historian knew what he was talking about. The Longest River the Nile is 4,160 miles long—the world’s longest river. It begins near the equator in Africa and flows north to the Mediterranean Sea. In the south the Nile churns with cataracts. A cataract is a waterfall. A delta is an area near a river’s mouth where the water deposits fine soil called silt. In the delta, the Nile divides into many streams. The river is called the upper Nile in the south and the lower Nile in the north. This soil was fertile, which means it was good for growing crops. Red Land, Black Land The ancient Egyptians lived in narrow bands of land on each side of the Nile. The red land was the barren desert beyond the fertile region. Eight months of the year were sunny and hot. The four months of winter were sunny but cooler. Most of the region received only an inch of rain a year. The parts of Egypt not near the Nile were a desert. Isolation The harsh desert acted as a barrier to keep out enemies. For these reasons, early Egyptians stayed close to home. When the birds arrived, the annual flood waters would soon follow. After the waters drained away, farmers could plant seeds in the fertile soil. These innovative, or new, techniques gave them more farmland. Egyptian Crops Ancient Egyptians grew a large variety of foods. They were the first to grind wheat into flour and to mix the flour with yeast and water to make dough rise into bread. Fruits included dates, figs, grapes, and watermelons. Egyptians also grew the materials for their clothes. Egyptians often painted walls white to reflect the blazing heat. They wove sticks and palm trees to make roofs. Inside, woven reed mats covered the dirt floor. Most Egyptians slept on mats covered with linen sheets. Wealthy citizens enjoyed bed frames and cushions. Some had a pool filled with lotus blossoms and fish. Poorer Egyptians simply went to the roof to cool off after sunset. They often cooked, ate, and even slept outside. Egypt’s economy depended on farming. For example, they wanted copper to make tools and weapons. Ancient Egyptians also desired gold for its bright beauty. Nubia was the Egyptian name for the area of the upper Nile that had the richest gold mines in Africa. Veins (long streaks) of copper, iron, and bronze were hidden inside desert mountains in the hot Sinai Peninsula, east of Egypt. These beautiful blue stones were used in jewelry. The Nile had fish and other wildlife that Egyptians wanted. One ancient painting even shows a man ready to hit a catfish with a wooden hammer. Egyptians also captured quail with nets. They used boomerangs to knock down flying ducks and geese. ( A boomerang is a curved stick that returns to the person who threw it.) The Nile then became a highway. Going south, they raised a sail and let the winds that blew in that direction push them. The Nile provided so well for Egyptians that sometimes they had surpluses, or more goods than they needed. They began to trade with each other. Ancient Egypt had no money, so people exchanged goods that they grew or made. This method of trade is called bartering. Egypt prospered along the Nile. This prosperity made life easier and provided greater opportunities for many Egyptians. For example, some ancient Egyptians learned to be scribes, people whose job was to write and keep records. Some skilled artisans erected stone or brick houses and temples. Other artisans made pottery, incense, mats, furniture, linen clothing, sandals, or jewelry. They brought back exotic woods, animal skins, and live beasts. As Egypt grew, so did its need to organize. Egyptians created a government that divided the empire into 42 provinces. Many officials worked to keep the provinces .